docs: Add and update SM & LM future work pages (#1050)
thousandbrainsproject/tbp.monty: docs/future-work/learning-module-improvements/better-model-surface-representation.md

---
title: Better Model Surface Representation

> description: Figure out and test a way to represent and objects surface better in our models or matching algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Figure out and test a way to represent an object's surface better in our models and/or matching algorithm.
```

rfc: optional
estimated-scope: unknown

> improved-metric: speed, pose, accuracy, noise

Reviewer: Should we add an improved metric for `model-sparsity`? This could fit with the fact that the Use fewer model points Future Work item refers to "Update learning algorithm, sensor module, and policy to learn sparser models." - i.e. this is not something that we can achieve through just a single change.

Author: Is there any advantage of model sparsity that speed doesn't already capture?

Reviewer: Yeah that's fair.

> output-type: experiments, analysis, PR

Reviewer: Maybe add publication? I think a genuine improvement here (and several of the other Future Work items you updated in this PR) would be a significant step if done, and worthy of making into a paper.

Author: I'm not sure this one would be. I think it might end up being a relatively small change. Maybe we add that once it is scoped more? But its a good point, I will go through all the items again and check if publication fits on some of them as well.

skills: python, research, monty
contributor: 
status: open
---

> [!NOTE]
> This item relates to [using models with fewer points](use-models-with-fewer-points.md), which would be one of the ways to measure success here.

> The naive way of testing whether a sensor is still on the object if a given hypothesis is correct is to apply the movement in the object's RF and searching in the radius of the new location whether there are points stored nearby in the model. However, this disregards the concept of surface, where we would want to have very little tolerance when the movement is going off the surface (i.e. in the direction of the surface normal) but allow for more tolerance if the next point along the surface is a bit further away. If we don't allow this second tolerance, we add a requirement to learn dense models where even a plain, even surface is represented with many points in the model because otherwise we won't find near enough neighbors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The naive way of testing whether a sensor is still on the object if a given hypothesis is correct is to apply the movement in the object's RF and, searching in the radius of the new location, determine whether there are points stored nearby in the model. However, this disregards the concept of surface, where we would want to have very little tolerance when the movement is going off the surface (i.e. in the direction of the surface normal) but allow for more tolerance if the next point along the surface is a bit further away. If we don't allow this second tolerance, we are forced to learn dense models where even a plain, even surface is represented with many points in the model because otherwise we won't find near enough neighbors.
```

![Example of problems with the naive approach of search. Sparsity in the model will lead to some search locations not having a nearby point stored in the model (red). If we increase the search radius, many points that should be off the object will be considered on object instead.](../../figures/future-work/search_naive.png)

> This problem is partially addressed by the custom distance metric we use in the EvidenceGraphLM, which takes into account the direction of the sensed surface normal when searching for nearest neighbors in the model (read more [here](../../how-monty-works/learning-module/evidence-based-learning-module.md#search-radius-and-distance-weighting)). However, it only works up to a certain degree of sparsity in the models. It also is only an approximation of surface representation (only during inference, using spherical radius without distinction between going into vs. out of the surface, basic heuristic to account for curvature). There might be small tweaks that could be made to it (account for curvature better, test parameters more) or a larger rethinking of representing surface in the models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This problem is partially addressed by the custom distance metric we use in the EvidenceGraphLM, which takes into account the direction of the sensed surface normal, as well as the amount of curvature, when searching for nearest neighbors in the model (read more [here](../../how-monty-works/learning-module/evidence-based-learning-module.md#search-radius-and-distance-weighting)). However, it only works up to a certain degree of sparsity in the models. It is also only an approximation of surface representation (only during inference, using spherical radius without distinction between going into vs. out of the surface, basic heuristic to account for curvature). There might be small tweaks that could be made to it (account for curvature better, test parameters more) or a larger rethinking of representing surface in the models.
```

> 

Reviewer: To help inspire further work, maybe we could add something like this? (+/- another drawing)

"For example, the existing method uses the surface curvature sensed at a point to adjust the search radius. However, in the absence of learning a dense model, there is no form of learning through repeated sensation that a surface might extend farther or less in different directions from a given point. This issue is apparent where there is asymmetry in the surface characteristics around a sensed point: in one direction, the curvature might continue smoothly for some time, while in the other, it might suddenly change (e.g. due to a sharp corner). An improved representation of surface should help us learn such surface characteristics, while avoiding an overly dense representation.

This might imply an inversion of how search operates - rather than the sensation determining the extent of the matching radius, learned characteristics of points and their surrounding surface could possibly dictate this."

Author: I'm not sure I follow this. Wouldn't we store sudden changes in curvature in the model already and then just have to use our algorithm to make use of this assumption? What would we additionally store in the model about the surface?

Reviewer: I guess my point is that the concept of a surface is really being captured by the single point we are sensing right now, and heuristics based on the curvature sensed there. The learned points themselves are not doing anything to capture a notion of an extending surface. I'm not sure exactly what the solution would look like, but it feels like that kind of inversion could be useful. Let me know if you want to Huddle, might be easier to describe.

Author: Ah okay, I see :) I was never able to figure out a way to make this work (like how can we adjust the search radius based on points that we first have to search for) but I think there actually is a way. I pushed a simplified version of your paragraphs (I am still not sure I understand the middle part). Happy to huddle if you want me to understand and add those parts too

Reviewer: Ok nice, yeah I think that's captured it well. And yeah I'm also not sure how it would work, but it feels like in biology (and maybe with the appropriate hardware?) it is possible, because it's basically just looking at the intersection of two spaces. Thanks for the update!

> ![How we currently account for surface when searching the models. Depending on the amount of curvature sensed, the search radius will be narrowed more or less in the direction of the sensed surface normal.](../../figures/future-work/search_incl_surface_rep.png)

Reviewer: Is it worth briefly mentioning the heuristic we have around point normal directions around 180 to distinguish two sides of a thin surface? It might be useful context for anyone coming up with an alternative formulation of surfaces.

![Example of problems with the naive approach of search. Sparsity in the model will lead to some search locations not having a nearby point stored in the model (red). If we increase the search radius, many points that should be off the object will be considered on object instead.](../../figures/future-work/search_naive.png)

This problem is partially addressed by the custom distance metric we use in the EvidenceGraphLM, which takes into account the direction of the sensed surface normal, as well as the amount of curvature, when searching for nearest neighbors in the model (read more [here](../../how-monty-works/learning-module/evidence-based-learning-module.md#search-radius-and-distance-weighting)). However, it only works up to a certain degree of sparsity in the models. It is also only an approximation of surface representation (only during inference, using spherical radius without distinction between going into vs. out of the surface, basic heuristic to account for curvature). There might be small tweaks that could be made to it (account for curvature better, test parameters more) or a larger rethinking of representing surface in the models.

> ![How we currently account for surface when searching the models. Depending on the amount of curvature sensed, the search radius will be narrowed more or less in the direction of the sensed surface normal. Points in the radius that have a surface normal that points in the opposite direction of the hypothesized one with be ignored in the evidence calculation to account for thin surface where points on both side of a surface will end up in the radius.](../../figures/future-work/search_incl_surface_rep.png)

Reviewer: A couple suggestions / typos but for some reason I can't do an inline suggestion:

--> Points in the radius with a surface normal pointing in the opposite direction of the hypothesized normal will be ignored in the evidence calculation. This accounts for thin surfaces where points on both side of a surface will end up in the radius.
